---
author: Henry
topic: Geek
comments: true
hide: true
---

A summary of hashing.

## 1. motivation

I did learned about hashing, a long time ago, but never think of how it can be applied while using it every day. For example, search file with name in the file system, check if two files are the same, online searching.

## 2. Walking through the background

The question begins with how do we store data so that we can look for it easily later? If there is no internal structure of the storing process, then, we can only check one by one.

An idea is to keep the stored key sorted, so that we can look for the item using binary search. As we know that the sorting based on comparison has a complexity lower bound $$O(nlogn)$$, and binary search with efficiency $$O(logn)$$. Can we make it even faster?

Bucket sort, which map the key and location so that we don't need to compare, reduce the sorting complexity to $$O(n)$$, but it has the draw back that it takes too much space, as much as all posible key values, which can be overwhelmingly large.

It is nature that we think of using smaller space, but also build a mapping from the key to the location and store the data. This is hashing. And the mapping is called hashing function.

## 3. Hasing function

Suppose that we know we have n items to store. and we want to use m space at most. We must have $$m \geq n$$. The hash function would be a function $$f(key) \rightarrow index, s.t. 0 \leq index < m.$$

The key of hasing can be anything, a string, a txt file, or a number. For the simple case where the key is just a number with its max as p. we can do the hashing by mod function $$f(key) = key mode m$$. Notice that some key numbers might have the same mode result, thus we need to handle the collision.

Other hashing function include

1. folding method
   
   Divide the key into several parts, process and then combine.
   
   For numbers, you can divide by several digits, reverse some of them, and then add it up.
   
   For strings, you can divide by characters, change to bits and then xor them.
  
   You can also mode the final result.

2. mid-square function

   Take a middle part of the squared key as the index.

   If the key is a string, we can use folding to change it to a number first.

   For performance, total index number should be power of 2 and we can get the middle by masking and shifting bits.

3. extraction

   Using only portion of the key to construct the index.

4. radix transformation

   Transformation the key to another base, then take the mode.

5. universal hash functions

   a class of functions that any of them will be expected to distribute the sample evenly and guarantee low probability of collisions.

   For number keys, $$(a * Key + b \mod p) \mod TSize \text{, and } 0 \leq a,b < p.$$

   For sequences of bytes $$K = K_1K_2 \cdots K_{r-1}$$
   \begin{equation}
     ((\sum_{i = 0}^{r-1} a_iK_i) \mod p) \mod Tsize \text{, and }0 \leq a_0, a_1, \cdots, a_{r-1} < p.
   \end{equation}
   
   
Think about a text file, the combination of all possible text file is unimagenable, but we want to store and find it efficiently, we can hash it to an index and make a table of hash index and its stored position.